
'''Note: this page documents the 1.4 version of SeqAn, see [[Tutorial]] if you need the documentation for the trunk version.'''
== Assignment 1 ==

=== Task ===

Write a program that constructs an index of the seqan:Class.StringSet "tobeornottobe", "thebeeonthecomb", "beingjohnmalkovich" and outputs the strings corresponding to suffix tree nodes in postorder DFS.

=== Solution ===

First we have to create a seqan:Class.StringSet of seqan:Shortcut.CharString (shortcut for <tt>String<char></tt>) and append the 3 strings to it.
This could also be done by using seqan:Function.resize and seqan:Function.assignValue.
The first template argument of the index class has to be adapted and is now a StringSet.
[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/index/index_assignment1.cpp, fragment=initialization)]]

To switch to postorder DFS we have two change the specialization tag of <tt>ParentLinks</tt> from <tt>Preorder</tt> to <tt>Postorder</tt>.
Please note that the seqan:"Spec.TopDown Iterator" always starts in the root node, which is the last postorder DFS node.
Therefore, the iterator has to be set explicitly to the first DFS node via seqan:Function.goBegin.
[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/index/index_assignment1.cpp, fragment=iteration1)]]

Alternatively to a seqan:"Spec.TopDownHistory Iterator" you also could have used a seqan:"Spec.BottomUp Iterator" with the same result.
The BottomUp Iterator automatically starts in the first DFS node as it supports no random access.
[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/index/index_assignment1.cpp, fragment=iteration2)]]

Program output:
<pre>
#html
<pre class="wiki" style="background-color:black;color:lightgray">
alkovich
beeonthecomb
beingjohnmalkovich
beornottobe
be
b
ch
comb
c
ebeeonthecomb
ecomb
eeonthecomb
eingjohnmalkovich
eonthecomb
eornottobe
eo
e
gjohnmalkovich
hebeeonthecomb
hecomb
he
hnmalkovich
h
ich
ingjohnmalkovich
i
johnmalkovich
kovich
lkovich
malkovich
mb
m
ngjohnmalkovich
nmalkovich
nottobe
nthecomb
n
obeornottobe
obe
ohnmalkovich
omb
onthecomb
ornottobe
ottobe
ovich
o
rnottobe
thebeeonthecomb
thecomb
the
tobeornottobe
tobe
ttobe
t
vich
</pre>
</pre>



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}