
'''Note: this page documents the 1.4 version of SeqAn, see [[Tutorial]] if you need the documentation for the trunk version.'''
== Tutorial Indices ==

[[TOC]]

 Learning Objective ::
  You will get an overview of the different kinds of indices in SeqAn and how they are used.
 Difficulty ::
  Average
 Duration ::
  1h
 Prerequisites ::
  [[Tutorial/Sequences]]

=== Indices in SeqAn ===
Indices in SeqAn are substring indices, meaning that they allow efficient pattern queries in strings or sets of strings. 
In contrast to e.g. online-search algorithms that search through the text in O(n), substring indices find a pattern in sublinear time o(n).

You can find the following indices in SeqAn:

{| border=1 class="simple"
! '''Specialization''' 
! '''Description''' 
|- 
|  seqan:Spec.IndexEsa 
|  Enhanced suffix array ([[Bibliography#Abouelhodaetal.2004| Abouelhoda et al., 2004]]) 
|- 
|  seqan:Spec.IndexWotd 
|  Lazy suffix tree, constructed node-by-node on-demand ([[Bibliography#Giegerichetal.2003| Giegerich et al., 2003]]) 
|- 
|  seqan:Spec.IndexDfi 
|  Lazy suffix tree for frequency based string mining ([[Bibliography#WeeseSchulz2008| Weese, Schulz, 2008]]) 
|- 
|  seqan:Spec.IndexQGram 
|  q-gram index 
|- 
|  [seqan:"Spec.Pizza & Chili Index" PizzaChili] 
|  An adapter for the [http://pizzachili.dcc.uchile.cl/ Pizza & Chili] index API 
|- 
|  seqan:Spec.FMIndex 
|  Fast and Minute Index  ([[Bibliography#FerraginaManzini2001| Ferragina., Manzini 2001]]) 
|}


=== Index Constuction ===

We will now show how we can create the different indices in SeqAn before we show how they are used for pattern search.

All the mentioned indices belong to the generic seqan:Class.Index class. A SeqAn index needs two pieces of information: the type of the seqan:Class.String or seqan:Class.StringSet to be indexed and the index specialization, such as seqan:Spec.IndexEsa or seqan:Spec.FMIndex.

Example:
The following code snippet creates an enhanced suffix array index of a string of type seqan:Spec.Dna5.
<pre>
#c++
String<Dna5> genome = "ACGTACGTACGTN";
Index<String<Dna5>, IndexESA<> > esaIndex(genome); 
</pre> 

In contrast, the next code snipped creates a FM index over a set of amino acid sequences:
<pre>
#c++
StringSet<String<AminoAcid> > protein;
appendValue(protein,  "VXLAGZ");
appendValue(protein,  "GKTVXL");
appendValue(protein,  "XLZ");

Index<StringSet<String<AminoAcid> >, FMIndex> fmIndex(protein); 
</pre>


==== Assignment 1 ====
<pre>#AssignmentBox

 Type :: Review 
 Objective :: Copy the code below and 
##change it to build an seqan:Spec.IndexEsa over a string of type seqan:Spec.Dna,
##add an seqan:Spec.IndexEsa over a seqan:Class.StringSet of seqan:"Class.String"s of type seqan:Spec.Dna.

<pre>
#c++
#include <seqan/sequence.h>
#include <seqan/index.h>

using namespace seqan;

int main()
{
    String<char> text = "This is the first example";
    Index<String<char>, FMIndex<> > index(text);

    return 0;
}
</pre>
 Solution ::
<pre>
#FoldOut
----
```html:github:seqan/seqan/master/core/demos/tutorial/index/indices_assignment_1.cpp```
</pre>
</pre>
```html:github:seqan/seqan/master/core/demos/tutorial/index/indices_assignment_1.cpp```
```html:github:gollum/gollum/master/test/file_view/1_file.txt```

=== Index Based Pattern Search (Strings) ===

SeqAn provides two methods for searching for a pattern in index structures.
One method uses iterators and is similar to traversing search trees or tries.
The tutorial [[Tutorial/IndicesDraft| Index Iterators]] explains this method in more detail.
In this section you will learn how to find a pattern with the seqan:Class.Finder interface.

The seqan:Class.Finder is an object that stores all necessary information for searching for a pattern using an index.
The following line of code shows how the seqan:Class.Finder is initialized:

<pre>
#c++
String<Dna5> genome = "ACGTACGTACGTN";
Index<String<Dna5>, IndexEsa<> > esaIndex(genome); 
Finder<Index<String<Dna5>, IndexEsa<> > > esaFinder(esaIndex);
</pre>

After initialization it is possible to use the seqan:Function.find function in order to trigger a search for all occurrences of a given pattern in the underlying seqan:Class.String or seqan:Class.StringSet. In this example, we search for the pattern <tt>ACGT</tt>:

<pre>
#c++
String<Dna5> genome = "ACGTACGTACGTN";
Index<String<Dna5>, IndexEsa<> > esaIndex(genome); 
Finder<Index<String<Dna5>, IndexEsa<> > > esaFinder(esaIndex);

find(esaFinder, "ACGT");
</pre>

Calling the function seqan:Function.find invokes the localization of all occurrences of a given pattern. 
It works by modifying pointers of the <tt>Finder</tt> to tables of the index. 
For example, the seqan:Class.Finder of <tt>esaIndex</tt> stores two pointers, pointing to the first and last suffix array entry that stores an occurrence of the pattern.

The return value of the seqan:Function.find function tells us whether or not a given pattern occurs in the text.
Furthermore, if there are several instances of a pattern, consecutive calls of seqan:Function.find will modify the seqan:Class.Finder such that it points to the next occurrence after each call: 

<pre>
#c++
#include <seqan/sequence.h>
#include <seqan/index.h>

using namespace seqan;

int main()
{
    String<Dna5> genome = "ACGTACGTACGTN";
    Index<String<Dna5>, IndexEsa<> > esaIndex(genome); 
    Finder<Index<String<Dna5>, IndexEsa<> > > esaFinder(esaIndex);

    find(esaFinder, "ACGT"); // first occurrence of "ACGT" 
    find(esaFinder, "ACGT"); // second occurrence of "ACGT"
    find(esaFinder, "ACGT"); // third occurrence of "ACGT"
}
</pre>

The above code is not very useful, since we do not know the locations of the first, second or third pattern occurrence. 
The function seqan:Function.position will help here. 
seqan:Function.position called on a finder returns the location of the <tt><tt>x</tt><tt>th pattern, where </tt><tt>x</tt></tt> can be the first, second, or any other occurrence of the pattern.

<pre>#c++
#include <seqan/sequence.h>
#include <seqan/index.h>

using namespace seqan;

int main()
{
    String<Dna5> genome = "ACGTACGTACGTN";
    Index<String<Dna5>, IndexEsa<> > esaIndex(genome); 
    Finder<Index<String<Dna5>, IndexEsa<> > > esaFinder(esaIndex);

    find(esaFinder, "ACGT"); // first occurrence of "ACGT"  
    position(esaFinder); // -> 0
    find(esaFinder, "ACGT"); // second occurrence of "ACGT"
    position(esaFinder); // -> 4
    find(esaFinder, "ACGT"); // third occurrence of "ACGT"
    position(esaFinder); // -> 8
}
</pre>

<pre>
#InfoBox
Indices in SeqAn are build on demand. That means that the index tables are not build when the constructor is called, but when we search for a pattern for the first time.
</pre>

==== Assignment 2 ====
<pre>
#AssignmentBox

 Type :: Application
 Objective :: Write a small program that prints the locations of all occurrences of "TATAA" in "TTATTAAGCGTATAGCCCTATAAATATAA".
 Hints ::
<pre>
#FoldOut
----
Use the seqan:Function.find function as the conditional instruction of a <tt>while</tt> loop.
</pre>
 Solution ::
<pre>
#FoldOut
----
[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/index/indices_assignment_2.cpp)]]
</pre>
</pre>

You might have noticed that we only applied the seqan:Spec.FMIndex and seqan:Spec.IndexEsa in the examples.
The reason for this is that even though everything stated so far is true for the other indices as well, seqan:Spec.IndexWotd and seqan:Spec.IndexDfi are more usefull when used with iterators as explained in [[Tutorial/IndexIterators| Index Iterators]] and the seqan:Spec.IndexQGram uses seqan:"Class.Shape"s which is also explained in another tutorial.

One last remark is necessary:
<pre>
#ImportantBox
If you search for two different patterns with the same seqan:Class.Finder object, you have to call the seqan:Function.clear function of the finder between the search for the two patterns. Otherwise the behavior is undefined.
</pre>

=== Handling Multiple Sequences (StringSets) ===
The previous sections already described how an index of a set of strings can be instantiated.
A character position of a seqan:Class.StringSet can be one of the following:

#A local position (default), i.e. a seqan:Class.Pair (seqNo, seqOfs) where seqNo identifies the string within the seqan:Class.StringSet and the seqOfs identifies the position within this string.
 2. A global position, i.e. a single integer value between 0 and the sum of string lengths minus 1. This integer is the position in the gapless concatenation of all strings in the seqan:Class.StringSet to a single string.

For indices, the meta-function seqan:Metafunction.SAValue determines, which position type (local or global) will be used for internal index tables (suffix array, q-gram array) and what type of position is returned by functions like seqan:Function.position of a seqan:Class.Finder. 
seqan:Metafunction.SAValue returns a seqan:Class.Pair (local position) by default, but could be specialized to return an integer type (global position) for some applications.
If you want to write algorithms for both variants you should use the functions seqan:Function.posLocalize, seqan:Function.posGlobalize, seqan:Function.getSeqNo, and seqan:Function.getSeqOffset.


==== Submit a  comment ====
If you found a mistake, or have suggestions about an improvement of this page press:
[/newticket?component=Documentation&description=Tutorial+Enhancement+for+page+http://trac.seqan.de/wiki/Tutorial/Indices&type=enhancement submit your comment]



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}
