
'''Note: this page documents the 1.4 version of SeqAn, see [[Tutorial]] if you need the documentation for the trunk version.'''
== Task 1: Character Counting ==

=== Task ===

Write a function <tt>countOneMers(str)</tt> that accepts a seqan:Shortcut.CharString of lower case characters and then prints a list of pairs.
Each of this pair gives a character and the number of occurences of this character in the string.
A pair should only be printed if the occurence count is greater than 0.
Call this function with the strings <tt>"helloworld"</tt>, <tt>"banana"</tt> and <tt>"mississippi"</tt>.

=== Solution ===

We start off by including the IO steams library from the STL and the sequence module from SeqAn.
Then, define the <tt>countOneMers</tt> function.
Note that it only works correctly for words that only consist of lower case characters.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/sequence/count_characters.cpp, fragment=includes)]]

Define a table for counting characters and resize-and-initialize it using seqan:Function.resize.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/sequence/count_characters.cpp, fragment=count-one-mers-initialize-table)]]

Count the characters in the given string.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/sequence/count_characters.cpp, fragment=count-one-mers-count-chars)]]

We print all pairs of characters and their counts if the ocunt is > 0.
Note that the explicit conversion to <tt>char</tt> from <tt>'a' + i</tt> is required.
Otherwise, the value would become an <tt>int</tt>.
The <tt>static_cast<></tt> is prefered to bracket-casting (e.g. <tt>(char)('a' + i)</tt> in SeqAn).

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/sequence/count_characters.cpp, fragment=count-one-mers-print-chars)]]

In our <tt>main</tt> function, we call <tt>countOneMers</tt> with the strings from the task.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/sequence/count_characters.cpp, fragment=main)]]

=== Program Output ===

<pre>
#html
<pre class="wiki" style="background-color:black;color:lightgray">
String: helloworld
d 1
e 1
h 1
l 3
o 2
r 1
w 1
String: mississippi
i 4
m 1
p 2
s 4
String: banana
a 3
b 1
n 2
</pre>
</pre>



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}