
'''Note: this page documents the 1.4 version of SeqAn, see [[Tutorial]] if you need the documentation for the trunk version.'''
== Multiple Sequence Alignment ==

[[TOC]]

 Learning Objective ::
  You will learn how to compute a multiple sequence alignment using SeqAn's alignment data structures and algorithms.
 Difficulty ::
  Basic
 Duration ::
  0:15h
 Prerequisites ::
  [[Tutorial/Basics| Basics]], [[Tutorial/Sequences| Sequences]], [[Tutorial/Alphabets| Alphabets]], [[Tutorial/AlignmentRepresentation| Alignment Representation]]

Apart from pairwise alignments, also multiple sequence alignments can be computed in SeqAn. The easiest way to do this is by using the function seqan:Function.globalMsaAlignment. This function computes a heuristic alignment based on a consistency-based progressive alignment strategy as described in [http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/24/16/i187 Seqan::TCoffee] paper. 

In the following example, we align four amino acid sequences using the seqan:"Spec.Alignment Graph" data structure and the [seqan:"Spec.Score Matrix" Blosum62] scoring matrix with gap extension penalty -11 and gap open penalty -1.
The required header for multiple sequence alignments is <tt>seqan/graph_msa.h</tt>.
[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_msa.cpp, fragment=main)]]

First, the sequence type <tt>TSequence</tt> is defined and a seqan:Class.StringSet is declared. The four sequences to be aligned are appended to the StringSet <tt>seq</tt>.
[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_msa.cpp, fragment=init)]]

Now we initialize our seqan:"Spec.Alignment Graph" with the sequences. The graph and the [seqan:"Spec.Score Matrix" Blosum62] scoring matrix are handed to the function seqan:Function.globalMsaAlignment which computes the desired alignment.
[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_msa.cpp, fragment=alignment)]]

And here is the output of this example program:
<pre>
#html
<pre class="wiki" style="background-color:black;color:lightgray">
Alignment matrix:
      0     .    :    .    :    .    :    .    :    .    :
        DPKKPRGKMSSYAFFVQTSREEHKKKHPDASVNFSEFSKKCSERWKTMSA
{| border=1 class="simple"
! 
!     
!
|}

        RVKRP---MNAFIVWSRDQRRKMALENP--RMRNSEISKQLGYQWKMLTE
          | |              | | |   |   | |    | |    | | |
        FPKKP---LTPYFRFFMEKRAKYAKLHP--EMSNLDLTKILSKKYKELPE
{| border=1 class="simple"
!/   |        | 
!                  
!      /
|}

        HIKKP---LNAFMLYMKEMRANVVAEST--LKESAAINQILGRRWHALSR

     50     .    :    .    :    .    :    .    :
        KEKGKFEDMAKADKARYEREMKTY----------IPPKGE
{| border=1 class="simple"
!  /   |    |        |
|}

        AEKWPFFQEAQKLQAMHREKYPNYKYRP---RRKAKMLPK
          |    |  |                            |
        KKKMKYIQDFQREKQEFERNLARFREDH---PDLIQNAKK
{| border=1 class="simple"
!      / |                        |
|}

        EEQAKYYELARKERQLHMQLYPGWSARDNYGKKKKRKREK
</pre>

==== Assignment 1 ====
<pre>#AssignmentBox

 Type :: Review
 Objective :: Repeat the above example using the Align data structure and the Blosum80 scoring matrix.

 Solution ::
<pre>
#FoldOut
----
A complete solution can be found [[Tutorial/Alignments/AssignmentMultipleAlignment1| here]].
</pre>

</pre>

==== Submit a  comment ====
If you found a mistake, or have suggestions about an improvement of this page press:
[/newticket?component=Documentation&description=Tutorial+Enhancement+for+page+http://trac.seqan.de/wiki/Tutorial/Alignments&type=enhancement submit your comment]



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}