
'''Note: this page documents the 1.4 version of SeqAn, see [[Tutorial]] if you need the documentation for the trunk version.'''
== Assignment 5 ==

=== Task ===

Write a program that outputs all occurrences of the gapped q-gram "AT-A" in "CATGATTACATA".

=== Solution ===

Before we can create a seqan:Shortcut.DnaString index of "CATGATTACATA", we have to choose an appropriate seqan:Class.Shape.
Because our shape <tt>1101</tt> is known at compile-time and contains only one gap we could choose seqan:Spec.OneGappedShape, seqan:Spec.GappedShape or seqan:Spec.GenericShape (see the commented-out code).
Although the seqan:Spec.GenericShape could be used for every possible shape, it is a good idea to choose a seqan:Class.Shape with restrictions as its seqan:Function.hash functions are more efficient in general.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/index/index_assignment5.cpp, fragment=initialization)]]

Please note that the seqan:Class.Shape object that corresponds to the seqan:Spec.IndexQGram index is empty initially and has to be set by seqan:Function.stringToShape or seqan:Function.resize.
This initialization is not necessary for seqan:Class.Shape that are defined at compile-time, i.e. seqan:Spec.UngappedShape and seqan:Spec.GappedShape.
To search for "AT-A" we first have to hash it with the index shape or any other seqan:Class.Shape with the same bitmap.
The we can use seqan:Function.getOccurrences to output all matches.
[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/index/index_assignment5.cpp, fragment=output)]]
'''Hint:''' Instead of <tt>length(getOccurrences(...))</tt> we could have used seqan:Function.countOccurrences.
But beware that seqan:Function.countOccurrences requires only the <tt>QGram_Dir</tt> fibre, whereas seqan:Function.getOccurrences requires both <tt>QGram_Dir</tt> and  <tt>QGram_SA</tt>, see [[HowTo/AccessIndexFibres| Index Fibre HowTo]].
Because <tt>QGram_SA</tt> can be much more efficiently constructed during the construction of <tt>QGram_Dir</tt>, <tt>QGram_Dir</tt> would be constructed twice.

Program output:
<pre>
#html
<pre class="wiki" style="background-color:black;color:lightgray">
1
4
</pre>
</pre>



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}