
'''Note: this page documents the 1.4 version of SeqAn, see [[Tutorial]] if you need the documentation for the trunk version.'''
== Motif Finding ==

<pre>#WarningBox
There are known issues with SeqAn's <tt>modif_finding</tt> module (also see [http://trac.seqan.de/ticket/95 Ticket 95 ]).
We are working on a solution to this problem.
</pre>

In this part of the tutorial we demonstrate how to find sequence motifs in ''multiple'' sequences. 

==== Multiple Sequence Motifs ====

Lets consider the following case:
We are given three DNA sequences of equal length and want to find all motifs that fulfill certain criteria.
In our example, we assume that the motif is four nucleotides long, occurs at least once per sequence, and contains at most one mismatch.

There are several motif finding algorithms in Seqan.
The header file <tt>seqan/find_motif.h</tt> includes all necessary data types and functions.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/extras/demos/tutorial/find_motif_pms1.cpp, fragment=includes)]]

For our example we choose the seqan:Spec.Pms1 method, which is an exhaustive enumeration algorithm, and therefore use this specialization for our seqan:Class.MotifFinder.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/extras/demos/tutorial/find_motif_pms1.cpp, fragment=typedefs)]]

Next, we append the sequences to a seqan:Class.String object.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/extras/demos/tutorial/find_motif_pms1.cpp, fragment=sequences)]]

Before we can construct an instance of the motif finder we have to specify the motif length (<tt>motifLength</tt>) and number of allowed mismatches (<tt>mm</tt>).
The parameter <tt>is_exact</tt> determines whether an occurence of the motif must have exactly <tt>mm</tt> mismatches or if <tt>mm</tt> is an upper bound.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/extras/demos/tutorial/find_motif_pms1.cpp, fragment=initialization)]]

The function seqan:Function.findMotif performs the search. Since we only want to find those motifs that occur at least once per sequence, we use the seqan:Tag.Omops tag.

The function seqan:Function.motifCount returns the number of found motifs.
The <tt>i</tt>th motif can be accessed by calling the function seqan:Function.getMotif.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/extras/demos/tutorial/find_motif_pms1.cpp, fragment=search)]]

The result of this example is:

<pre>
#html
<pre class="wiki" style="background-color:black;color:lightgray">
0: ACAG
1: AGCC
2: CCAG
3: GCAG
4: TCAG
</pre>
</pre>

==== Assignments ====
 ''Task 1'' ::
  Write a program which finds motifs of length three with exactly one mismatch in the sequences <tt>hatpins</tt>, <tt>low-fat</tt>, and <tt>habitat</tt>.
  Each sequence should have exactly one occurence of the motif.
  Use the randomized heuristic seqan:Spec.Projection algorithm.<br>
 ''Difficulty'' :: 2
 ''Solution:'' :: [[Tutorial/MotifFinding/Assignment| can be found here]].

==== Submit a  comment ====
If you found a mistake, or have suggestions about an improvement of this page press:
[/newticket?component=Documentation&description=Tutorial+Enhancement+for+page+http://trac.seqan.de/wiki/Tutorial/MotifFinding&type=enhancement submit your comment]



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}