
'''Note: this page documents the 1.4 version of SeqAn, see [[Tutorial]] if you need the documentation for the trunk version.'''
== Assignment 2: Intermediate Solution ==

Include the necessary headers.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment2.cpp, fragment=include)]]

Implementation of the <tt>findPatternInReference</tt> function.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment2.cpp, fragment=findPatternInReference)]]

Implementation of the <tt>searchPattern</tt> function. Note that we haven't implemented the function <tt>findPatternInJournalString </tt> yet.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment2.cpp, fragment=searchPattern)]]

Implementation of the <tt>loadAndJoin</tt> function.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment2.cpp, fragment=loadAndJoin)]]

Implementation of the <tt>main</tt> function.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment2.cpp, fragment=main)]]

Printing the hits of the reference sequence.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment2.cpp, fragment=printResult)]]

And here is the result.
<pre>
#html
<pre class="wiki" style="background-color:black;color:lightgray">
Search for: GTGGT:
Hit in reference  at 311: GTGGT	644: GTGGT	
</pre>



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}