
'''Note: this page documents the 1.4 version of SeqAn, see [[Tutorial]] if you need the documentation for the trunk version.'''
== Assignment 1: Gotoh Algorithm ==

==== Objective ==== 

Compute a global alignment between the DNA sequences "AAATGACGGATTG" "AGTCGGATCTACTG" using the Gotoh algorithm with the following scoring parameters: match = 4, mismatch = -2, gap open = -4 and gap extend = -2. Store the alignment in an Align object and and print it together with the score.

==== Solution ====

First we have to define the body of our program. This includes the definition of the library headers that we want to use. In this case it is the <tt>iostream</tt> from the STL and the <tt>seqan\align.h</tt> header file defining all algorithms and data structures we want to use. After we added the namespace and opened the <tt>main</tt> body we define our types we want to use in this function. We use an seqan:Class.String with the seqan:Spec.Dna alphabet, since we know that we work with DNA sequences. The second type is our seqan:Class.Align object storing the alignment later on. 

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_global_assignment1.cpp, fragment=main)]]

In the next step we initialize our objects. This includes the both input sequences <tt>seq1</tt> and <tt>seq2</tt> and <tt>align</tt>. We resize the underlying set of <tt>align</tt> that manages the separate seqan:Class.Gaps data structures. Finally, we assign the input sequences as sources to the corresponding row of <tt>align</tt>.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_global_assignment1.cpp, fragment=init)]]

Now we compute the alignment using a scoring scheme with affine gap costs. The first parameter corresponds to the <tt>match</tt> value, the second to the <tt>mismatch</tt> value, the third to the <tt>gap extend</tt> value and the last one to the <tt>gap open</tt> value. We store the computed score of the best alignment in the equally named variable <tt>score</tt>. In the end we print the score and the alignment using print methods provided by the <tt>iostream</tt> module of the STL.

[[Include(source:tags/seqan-1.4.0/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_global_assignment1.cpp, fragment=alignment)]]

Congratulation! You have computed an alignment using affine gap costs.
Here the result of the program:
<pre>
#html
<pre class="wiki" style="background-color:black;color:lightgray">
Score: 16
      0     .    :    .   
        AAATGACGGAT----TG
{| border=1 class="simple"
!
!/    
!
|}

        A---GTCGGATCTACTG
</pre>



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}