
== Schedule Wednesday: What do we fix in the next release? ==

#Resolving tickets
#Discus open questions in naming conventions and function names (fill, supremumValue)? Dna/BWT Index_ESA/data_host -> IdentifierRenaming in the Wiki
#Documentation System: document include headers, +deprecated/defective/issues tags, Wiki Tutorial/Demos vs. DDDoc Overview/Demos
**remove Overview pages, transfer them into Wiki
**complete include tag documentation
#What functionality do we need: swap
#Release razers2 as the *new* razers
#Put microRazerS and SplitRazerS into one folder with its razers.h
#What to do with Seeds/Seeds2 in the release?
#Include local_swift variation detection tools as *new*?
#Adjust module responsibilities

== Schedule Thursday ==

== Schedule Friday ==

== Tasks ==
=== Topics to discuss ===

*Yearly releases or continuously when tests succeed
*How to handle external contributions
*Naming convention for abbreviations  Dna or BWT?
*Naming conventions for helper functions _underdash_joinedCamel_case?
*Long term aim: Compiling without generated forwards?
*Motif Finding
*Seeds/Seeds2

=== Renaming/Restructuring tasks ===

*change fill(obj,size,val) -> resize(obj,size,val) #77
*add swap #296 and swapValue
*unify reverse and reverseInPlace #359
*rename SupremumValue/supremumValue and infimumValue/InfimumValue to [m|M]aximum/[m|M]inimumValue, see #260
*make internal typedefs in meta-functions local, see #289 Iterator<T>::Iterator defined, Interne typedefs private or with underscore?
*removing auto-containers, i.e. that <tt>int</tt> is a *container* of <tt>int</tt> of length 1. #360
**Infixes #288
*Requirements for a better I/O infrastructure: Files, streams, <tt>FILE*</tt> #361
*Make I/O subroutines public? #362
*Holder has to become an auto pointer/smart pointer/shared pointer. #363
*Iterator conversion concept. What's automatic? What is not? #280 #250
*Rename demo <tt>iterator</tt> to different name since GCC makes <tt>#include <iterator></tt> look in the current directory which is bad behaviour and include the iterator binary for demos. (#324)
**Only a problem if CPATH is set incorrectly.

=== Possible tasks for code review days during SeqAn retreat ===

Please suggest issues that we could work on during the code review days of the SeqAn retreat here:

*Command line parser:
**OptionType::List
**Scientific notation #295
*Journaled Sequence:
**Cleanup of Journal type.
**Support the clear and copy space functions so infixes work.
*Clean alignment algorithms: files, interfaces
*razers, care about gapped params
*Add function to batch-write FASTA/FASTQ files, also see attachment:util.h
*Seed Module
**extension algorithms in seeds2 module
**see whether new seed module is affected by #277 
*Remove multiple entries in documentation, e.g. in seqan:"Tag.Seed Extension".
**They are there twice because of module seeds2. -- Manuel
*I think Gotoh has problems, maybe banded broken? I don't remember exactly but there were some issues (with score). -- Manuel
*<s>Rna alphabet</s>
*<s>more documentation for score matrices</s>
*<tt>#include <seqan/file.h></tt> nötig für stringausgabe
**Possible “fix”: rename <tt>file.h</tt> to <tt>io.h</tt> (to make semantics clearer), keep <tt>file.h</tt> for backwards compatibility.
*Include tests in attachment:test_align_matrix.cpp
*Fix inserts at beginning of alignments in seqan:Class.FragmentStore, requires some more thought.
*Minor Tickets: #286 #295 #75 #89 #275 #71 #61 #251 #269 #250 #273 #191 #263 #321 and all other open ones.
*Tags should be name TagName_ instead of _TagName, see #290.
*Documentation: Search may return multiple results of same name (e.g. <tt>clear</tt>) without hint which is which.
*<tt>host</tt> should be an alias to <tt>haystack</tt> for <tt>Finder</tt>s, otherwise certain documentation items (e.g. [http://www.seqan.de/dddoc/html_devel/FUNCTION.begin_Position.html beginPosition]) are incorrect since they only refer to <tt>host</tt>.
**Similarly, both <tt>host</tt> and <tt>needle</tt> are defined for <tt>Pattern</tt>s but it’s unclear from the documentation how they differ.

=== Infrastructure ===

*Remove spam from Wiki, what about non-editable changes in tickets? (e.g. #77) wrote email to staff
*Toolbox, building/documentation/marking of apps
*Documentation system: Add deprecated, defective flag feature.
*Have ticket components (categories) for every SeqAn module and demos/apps etc.?



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}