
== TracAdmin ==
[[TracGuideToc]]

Trac is distributed with a powerful command-line configuration tool. This tool can be used  to configure and customize your Trac-installation to better fit your needs.

Some of those operations can also be performed via the ''Admin'' web interface, an updated version of the [trac:WebAdmin] plugin now integrated within Trac (since version 0.11).

=== Usage ===

For nearly every <tt>trac-admin</tt> command, you'll need to specify the path to the TracEnvironment that you want to administer as the first argument, for example:
<pre>
trac-admin /path/to/projenv wiki list
</pre>

The only exception is for the <tt>help</tt> command, but even in this case if you omit the environment, you'll only get a very succinct list of commands (<tt>help</tt> and <tt>initenv</tt>), the same list you'd get when invoking <tt>trac-admin</tt> alone.
Also, <tt>trac-admin --version</tt> will tell you about the Trac version (e.g. 0.12) corresponding to the program.

If you want to get a comprehensive list of the available commands and sub-commands, you need to specify an existing environment:
<pre>
trac-admin /path/to/projenv help
</pre>

Some commands have a more detailed help, which you can access by specifying the command's name as a subcommand for <tt>help</tt>:

<pre>
trac-admin /path/to/projenv help <command>
</pre>

==== <tt>trac-admin <targetdir> initenv</tt> ==== #initenv

This subcommand is very important as it's the one used to create a TracEnvironment in the specified <tt><targetdir></tt>. That directory must not exist prior to the call.

[[TracAdminHelp(initenv)]]

It supports an extra <tt>--inherit</tt> option, which can be used to specify a global configuration file which can be used share settings between several environments. You can also inherit from a shared configuration afterwards, by setting the <tt>[inherit] file</tt> option in the <tt>conf/trac.ini</tt> file in your newly created environment, but the advantage of specifying the inherited configuration file at environment creation time is that only the options ''not'' already specified in the global configuration file will be written in the created environment's <tt>conf/trac.ini</tt> file.
See TracIni#GlobalConfiguration.

Note that in version 0.11 of Trac, <tt>initenv</tt> lost an extra last argument <tt><templatepath></tt>, which was used in previous versions to point to the <tt>templates</tt> folder. If you are using the one-liner '<tt>trac-admin /path/to/trac/ initenv <projectname> <db> <repostype> <repospath></tt>' in the above and getting an error that reads ''''<tt>Wrong number of arguments to initenv: 4</tt>'''', then this is because you're using a <tt>trac-admin</tt> script from an '''older''' version of Trac.

=== Interactive Mode ===

When passing the environment path as the only argument, <tt>trac-admin</tt> starts in interactive mode.
Commands can then be executed on the selected environment using the prompt, which offers tab-completion
(on non-Windows environments, and when the Python <tt>readline</tt> module is available) and automatic repetition of the last command issued.

Once you're in interactive mode, you can also get help on specific commands or subsets of commands:

For example, to get an explanation of the <tt>resync</tt> command, run:
<pre>
> help resync
</pre>

To get help on all the Wiki-related commands, run:
<pre>
> help wiki
</pre>

=== Full Command Reference ===

You'll find below the detailed help for all the commands available by default in <tt>trac-admin</tt>. Note that this may not match the list given by <tt>trac-admin <yourenv> help</tt>, as the commands  pertaining to components disabled in that environment won't be available and conversely some plugins activated in the environment can add their own commands.

[[TracAdminHelp()]]

----
See also: TracGuide, TracBackup, TracPermissions, TracEnvironment, TracIni, [trac:TracMigrate TracMigrate]



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}