
== The Trac Repository Browser ==
[[TracGuideToc]]

The Trac repository browser can be used to browse specific revisions of directories 
and files stored in the repositories associated with the Trac environment.

''(since 0.12)'': 
At the top-level of the repository browser is the '''Repository Index''', 
listing all the configured repositories. 
Each repository has a name which is used as a path prefix in a 
"virtual" file hierarchy encompassing all the available repositories.
If a default repository has been configured, its top-level files and directories 
are also listed, in a '''Default Repository''' section placed before the 
repository index. If the default repository is the only repository associated 
with the Trac environment the '''Repository Index''' will be omitted <sup>[#note-multirepos (1)]</sup>.

Directory entries are displayed in a list with sortable columns. The list 
entries can be sorted by ''Name'', ''Size'', ''Age'' or ''Author'' by clicking on the column
headers. The sort order can be reversed by clicking on a given column
header again.

The browser can be used to navigate through the directory structure 
by clicking on the directory names. 
Clicking on a file name will show the contents of the file. 
Clicking on the revision number of a file or directory will take 
you to the TracRevisionLog for that file.
Note that there's also a ''Revision Log'' navigation link that will do the 
same for the path currently being examined.
Clicking on the ''diff'' icon after revision number will display the changes made 
to the files modified in that revision.
Clicking on the ''Age'' of the file - will take you to that changeset in the timeline.

It's also possible to browse directories or files as they were in history,
at any given repository revision. The default behavior is to display the
latest revision but another revision number can easily be selected using
the ''View revision'' input field at the top of the page.

The color bar next to the ''Age'' column gives a visual indication of the age
of the last change to a file or directory, following the convention that
'''[[span(style=color:#88f,blue)]]''' is oldest and '''[[span(style=color:#f88,red)]]'''
is newest, but this can be [TracIni#browser-section configured].

At the top of the browser page, there's a ''Visit'' drop-down menu which you can use 
to select some interesting places in the repository, for example branches or tags. 
This is sometimes referred to as the ''browser quickjump'' facility.
The precise meaning and content of this menu depends on your repository backend.
For Subversion, this list contains by default the top-level trunk directory 
and sub-directories of the top-level branches and tags directories 
(<tt>/trunk</tt>, <tt>/branches/*</tt>, and <tt>/tags/*</tt>).  This can be [TracIni#svn-section configured] 
for more advanced cases.

If you're using a Javascript enabled browser, you'll be able to expand and 
collapse directories in-place by clicking on the arrow head at the right side of a 
directory. Alternatively, the [trac:TracKeys keyboard] can also be used for this: 
 - use <tt>'j'</tt> and <tt>'k'</tt> to select the next or previous entry, starting with the first
 - <tt>'o'</tt> (open) to toggle between expanded and collapsed state of the selected 
   directory or for visiting the selected file 
 - <tt>'v'</tt> (view, visit) and <tt>'<Enter>'</tt>, same as above
 - <tt>'r'</tt> can be used to force the reload of an already expanded directory
 - <tt>'A'</tt> can be used to directly visit a file in annotate (blame) mode
 - <tt>'L'</tt> to view the log for the selected entry
If no row has been selected using <tt>'j'</tt> or <tt>'k'</tt> these keys will operate on the entry under the mouse .

<pre>#comment
MMM: I guess that some keys are upper case and some lower to avoid conflicts with browser defined keys.
I find for example in Firefox and IE on windows that 'a' works as well as 'A' but 'l' does not work for 'L'.
 cboos: 'l' is reserved for Vim like behavior, see #7867
</pre>

For the Subversion backend, some advanced additional features are available:
 - The <tt>svn:needs-lock</tt> property will be displayed
 - Support for the <tt>svn:mergeinfo</tt> property showing the merged and eligible information
 - Support for browsing the <tt>svn:externals</tt> property 
   (which can be [TracIni#svn:externals-section configured])
 - The <tt>svn:mime-type</tt> property is used to select the syntax highlighter for rendering 
   the file. For example, setting <tt>svn:mime-type</tt> to <tt>text/html</tt> will ensure the file is 
   highlighted as HTML, regardless of the file extension. It also allows selecting the character 
   encoding used in the file content. For example, if the file content is encoded in UTF-8, 
   set <tt>svn:mime-type</tt> to <tt>text/html;charset=utf-8</tt>. The <tt>charset=</tt> specification overrides the 
   default encoding defined in the <tt>default_charset</tt> option of the <tt>[trac]</tt> section 
   of [TracIni#trac-section trac.ini].
<pre>#comment
MMM: I found this section a bit hard to understand. I changed the first item as I understood that well.
but I think the other items could be changed also
 cboos: in the meantime, I've added the ''advanced'' word as a hint this can be a bit complex...
</pre>


----
<pre>#div style="font-size:85%"
[=#note-multirepos (1)] -  This means that after upgrading a single-repository Trac of version 
0.11 (or below) to a multi-repository Trac (0.12), the repository browser will look and feel 
the same, that single repository becoming automatically the "default" repository.
</pre>

See also: TracGuide, TracChangeset, TracFineGrainedPermissions



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}