
== Task 2: Semi-global alignment ==

=== Task ===
Compute a semi-global alignment of the sequences "blablablu" and "abab" using edit distance and an alignment algorithm of your choice. Print distance and alignment

Hint: When using the Alignment Graph data structure, one can compute more sophisticated alignments, so called end-space free alignments. These alignments can be computed by using the regular global alignment algorithms, but initializing the DP matrix with zeros in the first row and/or column, and/or by searching for the best score in the last row and/or column. This can be achieved by using an AlignConfig object that specifies which end spaces are free from penalty (see also seqan:Page.Alignments).

=== Solution ===
As usual, first the necessary includes and typedefs. Our sequence type is <tt>String<char></tt>. 
[[Include(source:trunk/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_pairwise_global_assignment2.cpp, fragment=main)]]

A seqan:Class.StringSet with the sequences to be aligned is created, and the seqan:"Spec.Alignment Graph" is initialized. 
[[Include(source:trunk/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_pairwise_global_assignment2.cpp, fragment=init)]]

Now we use an seqan:Class.AlignConfig to configure our alignment to be semi-global (the second sequence being contained in the first sequence). The signature is <tt>AlignConfig<TTop, TLeft, TRight, TBottom></tt>. <tt>TTop</tt> is true meaning that the first row of the DP matrix is initialized with zeros (gaps before the start of the second sequence are free), <tt>TLeft</tt> and <tt>TRight</tt> to false meaning that all gaps in the first sequence receive a penalty, and <tt>TBottom</tt> to true, leaving gaps at the end of the second sequence unpunished.
[[Include(source:trunk/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_pairwise_global_assignment2.cpp, fragment=alignment)]]

[[Include(source:trunk/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_pairwise_global_assignment2.cpp, fragment=iterate)]]

And the output:
<pre>
#html
<pre class="wiki" style="background-color:black;color:lightgray">
Score = 3
Alignment matrix:
      0     .     
        blablablu
{| border=1 class="simple"
! 
|}

        --ab-ab--
 
</pre>



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}