
=== Metafunctions ===

Generic algorithms usually have to know certain types that correspond to their arguments: 
An algorithm on containers may need to know which type of values are stored in the string, 
or what kind of iterator we need to access it. The usual way in the STL is to define the value type of a class like <tt>vector</tt> as a ''member typedef'' of this class,
so it can be retrieved by <tt>vector::value_type</tt>.

Unfortunately member typedef declarations have the same disadvantages as any members:
Since they are specified by the class definition, they cannot be changed or added to the class without changing the code of the class,
and it is not possible in C++ to define members for built-in types.
What we need therefore is a mechanism that returns an output type (e.g. the value type) given an input type (e.g. the string)
and doing so does not rely on members of the input type, but instead uses some kind of global interface.

Such task can be performed by '''metafunctions''', also known as '''type traits'''.
A metafunction is a construct to map some types or constants to other entities like types, constants, functions, or objects at compile time.
The name metafunction comes from fact that they can be regarded as part of a meta-programming language that is evaluated during compilation. 

In SeqAn we use class templates to implement metafunctions in C++.
Generic algorithms usually have to know certain types that correspond to their arguments: 
An algorithm on strings may need to know which type of characters are stored in the string, or what kind of iterator can be used to browse it. 
SeqAn uses Metafunctions (also known as "traits") for that purpose. 
For example: Assuming that we define a string of amino acids:

<pre>
#cpp
String<AminoAcid> str = "ARN";
</pre>

Now lets define a function that exchanges the first two values in a string:

<pre>
#cpp
void exchangeFirstValues(String<AminoAcid> & str) 
{ 
    if (length(str) < 2) return; 
    AminoAcid temp = str[0]; 
    str[0] = str[1]; 
    str[1] = temp; 
}
</pre>

Since this function only works for instances of [dox:String String<][dox:AminoAcid AminoAcid>], we could try to make it more general by making a template out of it:

<pre>
#cpp
template <typename T> 
void exchangeFirstValues(T & str) 
{ 
    if (length(str) < 2) return; 
    AminoAcid temp = str[0]; 
    str[0] = str[1]; 
    str[1] = temp; 
}
</pre>

Now the function works for all sequence types <tt>T</tt> that store <tt>AminoAcid</tt> objects, but it will fail for other value types as soon as the variable temp cannot store <tt>str[0]</tt> anymore. 
To overcome this problem, we must redefine <tt>temp</tt> in a way that it can store a value of the correct type. The question is: 

"Given a arbitrary type <tt>T</tt>, what is the value type of <tt>T</tt>?" 

The metafunction [dox:ConatinerConcept#Value Value] anwers this question: 
"The value type of <tt>T</tt> is given by <tt>Value<T>::Type</tt>." 

Hence, the final version of our function <tt>exchangeFirstValues</tt> reads as follows:

<pre>
#cpp
template <typename T> 
void exchangeFirstValues(T & str) 
{ 
    if (length(str) < 2) return; 
    typename Value<T>::Type temp = str[0]; 
    str[0] = str[1]; 
    str[1] = temp; 
}
</pre>

We can view <tt>Value</tt> as a kind of "function" that takes <tt>T</tt> as an argument (in angle brackets) and returns the required value type of <tt>T</tt>. 
In fact, <tt>Value</tt> is not implemented as a C++ function, but as a class template. 
This class template is specialized for each sequence type <tt>T</tt> in a way that the <tt>typedef Type</tt> provides the value type of <tt>T</tt>. 
Unfortunately, the current C++ language standard does not allow to write simply "<tt>Value<T> temp</tt>;", so we must select the return value by appending "<tt>::Type</tt>". 
The leading "<tt>typename</tt>" becomes necessary since <tt>Value<T>::Type</tt> is a type that depends on a template parameter of the surrounding function template.

=== Type Metafunctions ===
The metafunction [dox:ConatinerConcept#Value Value] is a type metafunction, i.e. it is used to determine a type. Type metafunctions have the form:

<tt>typename TypeMetaFunc<T1, T2, ..., TN>::Type</tt>

<tt>TypeMetaFunc</tt>: The name of the metafunction<br>
<tt>T1, T2, ..., TN</tt>: Arguments (types or constants)<br>
<tt>Type</tt>: The resulting type<br>

The keyword <tt>typename</tt> must be stated if one of the arguments <tt>T1, T2, ..., TN</tt> is or uses a template parameter.
For example the following piece of code uses the metafunction <tt>Iterator</tt> to determine an iterator type for a string class:

<pre>
#cpp
String<char> str = "I am a string"; 
Iterator<String<char> >::Type it = begin(str); 
while (! atEnd(it, str))  
{ 
    ::std::cout << *it; 
    ++it; 
}
</pre>

=== Value Metafunctions ===
Metafunctions can also be used to determine constant values at compile time. The general form of value metafunctions is:

<tt>VALUE_META_FUNC<T1, T2, ..., TN>::VALUE</tt>

<tt>VALUE_META_FUNC</tt>: The name of the metafunction<br>
<tt>T1, T2, ..., TN</tt>:	Arguments (types or constants)<br>
<tt>VALUE</tt>:	The resulting constant value

For example the following function prints the length of a fixed sized string using the value metafunction [dox:LENGTH LENGTH] :

<pre>
#cpp
template <typename T> 
void printLenOfFixedSizeString(T const &) 
{ 
    ::std::cout << LENGTH<T>::VALUE; 
} 

String<char, Array<100> > my_str; 
printLenOfFixedSizeString(my_str);
</pre>


=== SeqAn Metafunctions ===
If you want to search for metafunctions only you can do so by only selecting the metafunction category to the left of the search window at the online documentation.

=== Assignment === 
 ''Task 1'' :: Write a generic program that swaps the value ranges <tt>[i,i+k)</tt> and <tt>[j,j+k)</tt> of a container <tt>str</tt>. The container should be specified as a template argument <tt>T</tt>.
  ''Hint'' :: Use the Metafunctions [dox:ContainerConcept#Value Value] to access the type of the elements in the container. Use the function [dox:RandomAccessContainerConcept#value value] to assign the values.
 ''Difficulty'' :: 2 
 ''Solution'' :: can be found [[Tutorial/Basics/swap| here.]]


==== Submit a  comment ====
If you found a mistake, or have suggestions about an improvement of this page press:
[/newticket?component=Documentation&description=Tutorial+Enhancement+for+page+http://trac.seqan.de/wiki/Tutorial/Metafunctions&type=enhancement submit your comment]



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}