
== Task 1: Pairwise global alignment ==

=== Task ===
 Write a program that computes a global alignment of the DNA sequences "acgtacgtact" and "actactacgt" using the Align data structure. Iterate through the rows of the aligment and for each row output the view positions of the gaps. 
Hint: Use the function seqan:Function.isGap. 

=== Solution ===
As usual, first the necessary includes and typedefs. Our sequence type is <tt>String<Dna></tt>. <tt>TAlign</tt> and <tt>TRow</tt> are defined as in the previous example program. The type <tt>Iterator<TRow>::Type</tt> will be used to iterate over the rows of the alignment.
[[Include(source:trunk/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_pairwise_global_assignment1.cpp, fragment=main)]]

The seqan:Class.Align object <tt>align</tt> is intialized with the two sequences to be aligned.
[[Include(source:trunk/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_pairwise_global_assignment1.cpp, fragment=init)]]

The alignment is computed by the Hirschberg algorithm. Score and alignment are printed on screen.
[[Include(source:trunk/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_pairwise_global_assignment1.cpp, fragment=alignment)]]

Now we iterate over the rows, printing the view position whenever the function seqan:Function.isGap returns true.
[[Include(source:trunk/core/demos/tutorial/alignments/alignment_pairwise_global_assignment1.cpp, fragment=iterate)]]

And the output:
<pre>
#html
<pre class="wiki" style="background-color:black;color:lightgray">
Score = 6
      0     .    :   
        ACGTACGTAC-T
{| border=1 class="simple"
! 
!/ 
!/ |
|}

        AC-TAC-TACGT
 
 
Row 0 contains gaps at positions: 
10
Row 1 contains gaps at positions: 
2
6
</pre>



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}