= Assignment 4: Complete Solution =

Include the necessary headers.

[[Include(source:trunk/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment4.cpp, fragment=include)]]

Search at the border the current node for the pattern.

[[Include(source:trunk/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment4.cpp, fragment=searchAtBorder)]]

Search for the pattern in the insertion region covered by the current node.

[[Include(source:trunk/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment4.cpp, fragment=findInPatchNode)]]

Check if hit was reported for this region in the reference sequence.

[[Include(source:trunk/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment4.cpp, fragment=findInOriginalNode)]]

Implementing the backbone of the search for the Journaled String.

[[Include(source:trunk/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment4.cpp, fragment=findPatternInJournalStringPart1)]]

Implementing the search for the reference sequence.

[[Include(source:trunk/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment4.cpp, fragment=findPatternInReference)]]

The backbone of the search method.

[[Include(source:trunk/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment4.cpp, fragment=searchPatternPart1)]]

Loading and joining the sequences.

[[Include(source:trunk/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment4.cpp, fragment=loadAndJoin)]]

Implementing the main function.

[[Include(source:trunk/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment4.cpp, fragment=main)]]

Reporting the identified hits.

[[Include(source:trunk/extras/demos/tutorial/data_journaling/solution_online_search_assignment4.cpp, fragment=printResult)]]

And here is the result.

{{{
#!html
<pre class="wiki" style="background-color:black;color:lightgray">
Search for: GTGGT:
Hit in reference  at 311: GTGGT	644: GTGGT	
Hit in sequence 0 at 151: GTGGT	312: GTGGT	
Hit in sequence 1 at 308: GTGGT	
Hit in sequence 2 at 311: GTGGT	507: GTGGT	
Hit in sequence 3 at 327: GTGGT	
Hit in sequence 4 at 307: GTGGT	312: GTGGT	317: GTGGT	
Hit in sequence 5 at 0: GTGGT	320: GTGGT	986: GTGGT
}}}

