
'''WORK IN PROGRESS'''
== Documentation Updates ==
[[TOC()]]

=== Documentation Structure ===

*We need to decide and document how the DDDoc tree looks like.

<pre>
.Concept.Container
..summary:A class for objects that contains other objects of a fixed type.

.Concept.Sequence
..general:Concept.Container
..summary:A linear sequence of objects.

.Class.String
..implements:Concept.Sequence
..summary:General purpose sequence container for elements.
..description:
Strings are at the heart of the SeqAn library.
There are various specializations, the @Spec.Alloc String@ being the simplest and most widely used one.
Other specializations provide advantages for special use cases, e.g. @Spec.Packed String@ or @Spec.MMap String@.
..implements:Concept.Sequence

.Spec.Alloc String
..class:Class.String
..summary:Simple @Class.String@ specialization that uses contiguous memory regions.
..description:
The Alloc String provides a String specialization based on dynamic arrays.

.Class.Gaps
..class.Concept.Sequence
..summary:Wrapper for @Concept.Sequence|sequences@ that stores gaps outside the wrapped object.
</pre>

=== Documentation Guideline ===

*We need to specify how a good documentation page looks like.

*Class Naming in Documentation
**Specializations extend the name "to the left" and must contain the name of their base class, e.g. "Spec.Alloc String" and "Spec.MMap String" are specializations of the class "Class.String".

=== DDDoc Syntax ===

*We need an updated explanation of the DDDoc syntax.



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}