
== White Paper: 2D Seeds ==

[[TOC()]]

This document describes the new interface for the seeds module.
The seeds module provides seeds between to sequences.

We consider seeds between a query sequence (dimension 0) and a database sequence (dimension 1).

=== Class Seed ===

Seeds are described by a left and a right position in each dimension, i.e. <tt>left0</tt>, <tt>left1</tt> for the left and <tt>right0</tt>, <tt>right1</tt> for the right point in each dimension.

<pre>
                                        database / dimension 1

 left1                   right1
        ,-+----------------+--------------------->
        |
  left0 + *
        |  \
        |   `--------.
        |             `---.
 right0 +                  *
        |
        V
  query / dimension 0
</pre>

Also, each seed as a lower and an upper diagonal, <tt>diag0</tt> and <tt>diag1</tt>, identified by a signed integer.
The middle diagonal is diagonal <tt>0</tt>, the ''k''-th diagonal to the lower left is <tt>-k</tt>, the ''k''-th diagonal to the upper right is <tt><tt>k</tt></tt>.

The class seed describes a seed.
It specifies the following interface (<tt>DefaultSeedConfig</tt> configures the internally used types).

<pre>
#cpp

struct DefaultSeedConfig
{
  typedef size_t TPosition;
  typedef size_t TSize;
  typedef typename _MakeSigned<TPosition>::Type TDiagonal;
};

class Seed<TSpec, TConfig=DefaultSeedConfig>
{
  Seed();
  Seed(left0, right0, left1, right1, diag0, diag1);
  // Construct a seed that consist of matches and mismatches only.
  Seed(left0, right0, length);
};

// Getters.
TPosition _getLeft0(seed);
TPosition _getRight0(seed);
TPosition _getLeft1(seed);
TPosition _getRight1(seed);
TDiagonal _getDiag0(seed);
TDiagonal _getDiag1(seed);
</pre>

Note that so far, no setters are specified.
The main reason is that the <tt>ChainedSeed</tt> specialization cannot support <tt>set{Left,Right}1</tt> because of how it stores the information internally.

Seeds support two main operations: ''Merging'' and ''extension''.

==== Seed Extension ====

The <tt>extension</tt> operation increases a seed's length to the right and down from the right end and to the left and up from the left end:

<pre>
#cpp
extendSeed(seed, sequence0, sequence1, direction, MatchExtend);
extendSeed(seed, sequence0, sequence1, direction, scoreDropOff, scoreMatrix, {UngappedMatchExtend,GappedMatchExtend});
</pre>

==== Seed Merging ====

The <tt>merge</tt> operation takes two seeds and merges the second one into the first one.
This can be done by simple ''merging'' or by ''chaining''.

<pre>
#cpp
mergeSeeds(first, second, Merge);
mergeSeeds(first, second, sequence0, sequence1, SimpleChain);
mergeSeeds(first, second, sequence0, sequence1, scoreMatrix, ChaosChain);
mergeSeeds(first, second, sequence0, sequence1, bandwidth, BlatChain);
</pre>

=== Seed Specializations ===

There are two specializations <tt>SimpleSeed</tt> and <tt>ChainedSeed</tt>.

==== <tt>SimpleSeed</tt> ====

Simple seeds simply store the left, right and diag values.

<pre>
#cpp
class Seed<Simple>
{
  TPosition left0;
  TPosition right0;
  TPosition left1;
  TPosition right1;
  TDiagonal diag0;
  TDiagonal diag1;
};
</pre>

==== <tt>ChainedSeed</tt> ====

Chained seeds store the diagonals the seed consists of with the diagonals in both dimensions.

<pre>
#cpp
struct _ChainedSeedDiagonal
{
  TPosition left0;
  TPosition left1;
  TLength length;
};

class Seed<Chained>
{
  std::list<_ChainedSeedDiagonal> _seedDiagonals;
  TDiagonal diag0;
  TDiagonal diag1;
};
</pre>

=== The Class SeedSet ===

The class SeedSet describes how a set of seeds is store.
The specialization determines how the seeds are managed.
Seeds can either be stored unsorted, sorted by diagonal or managed in a datastructure that efficiently supports range queries.

<pre>
#cpp
class SeedSet<TSpec>
{
};
</pre>

==== Adding Seeds ====

<pre>
#cpp
addSeed(set, seed, Single);
addSeed(set, seed, gapThreshold, Merge);
addSeed(set, seed, sequence0, sequence1, bandwidth, Chaos);
addSeed(set, seed, sequence0, sequence1, bandwidth, Blat);
</pre>

=== SeedSet Specializations ===

There are three specialization for <tt>SeedSet</tt> that differ in how they manage the seeds.
Seeds can be unsorted (<tt>Unsorted</tt>) sorted in one dimension by their diagonal (<tt>BalancedTree</tt>), or managed in a datastructure that allows efficient range queries by their end point (<tt>KdTree</tt>).

=== Local Seed Adding Algorithms ===

==== addSeed: Single ====

Always successful, force-adding the seed.

<pre>
bool addSeed(set, seed, Single)
{
  insert(set.seeds, seed);
}
</pre>

==== addSeed: Merging, Chaos, Blat ====

Try to find a seed for merging.
If successful, merge new seed into existing one and return true.
Otherwise, return false.

<pre>
bool addSeed(set, seed, sequence0, sequence1, bandwidth, gapThreshold, algorithmTag)
{
  Seed * existing = findMateForMerge(set, seed, bandwidth, gapThreshold, algorithmTag);
  if (existing == 0)
    return false;
  mergeSeeds(set, existing, seed, bandwidth, gapThreshold, algorithmTag);
  return true;
}
</pre>

==== findMateForMerge: Merging, Chaos, Blat ====

This function can be simple, based on seeds being sorted by diagonal.

==== mergeSeeds: Merging ====

Very simple, only adjust first, last points and diagonals.

==== mergeSeeds: Chaos ====

Use CHAOS merging.

==== mergeSeeds: Blat ====

Use BLAT merging.

=== Banded Chain Alignment ===

Revised global function interface which matches the structure of the globalAlignment interface.
We added a second score scheme to evaluate different gaps and anchors differently. 

<pre>
#WarningBox
At the moment the minimal size of the band extension must be one. The banded chain alignment cannot process bands of size one (Hamming-Distance). This will be added soon!
</pre>


<pre>
#cpp
bandedChainAlignment(align, seedChain, scoringScheme1, scoringScheme2, alignConfig, bandExtension);
bandedChainAlignment(gapsH, gapsV, seedChain, scoringScheme1, scoringScheme2, bandExtension);
bandedChainAlignment(frags, strings, seedChain, scoringScheme1, alignConfig, bandExtension);
bandedChainAlignment(alignmentGraph, seedChain, scoringScheme1, alignConfig);
</pre>



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}