= Compiler Support =
[[TOC()]]

'''THIS IS WORK IN PROGRESS'''

This article describes the compiler support timeline of SeqAn and the policy behind it.

== Compiler Support ==

At the moment, SeqAn strives to support the C++ compilers '''GCC''', '''llvm/clang''', and '''Microsoft Visual C++'''.
We directly support the operating systems '''Debian Linux''', '''Mac Os X''', and '''Microsoft Windows''' and have [http://www.seqan.de/cdash/index.php?project=SeqAn nightly tests] for them.
We want to support both 32 and 64 bit address widths.

The following table shows the supported compilers and operating systems for the current trunk version of SeqAn:

|| '''Compiler''' || '''OS''' || ''Compiler Versions'' ||
|| GCC || Linux || >=4.3 ||
|| GCC || Mac Os X || 4.2 ||
|| LLVM || Linux || 2.9, trunk ||
|| LLVM || Mac Os X || "3.0"* ||
|| Visual C++ || Windows || 8 ("2005"), 9 ("2008"), 10 ("2010") ||
|| MinGW || Windows || 8 ("2005"), 9 ("2008"), 10 ("2010") ||

* Dubbed 3.0, the XCode 4.1 compiler is actually 3.0 rc1.

== Timeline ==

Later versions are always supported.
No expiration date is given for them, [#Policy Policy] explains how to compute it for them.

|| Compiler || Version || Support Up To ||
|| GCC || 4.2 || Dec 2011 ||
|| GCC || 4.3, 4.4 || Debian 6.0 Release + 6mo ||
|| LLVM || 2.9 || Debian 6.0 Release + 6mo ||
|| VC++ || 8 || VC++ 11 Release ||
|| VC++ || 9 || VC++ 12 Release ||
|| VC++ || 10 || VC++ 13 Release ||

An exception in the future is given in [#Policy Policy].

== Policy ==

The policy for Visual C++ is to support the three most recent compiler versions.

The policy for GCC is to support all versions up from the compilers in the latest stable Debian version.
The compilers from the previous version are supported for up to 6-12 months more to give people time to upgrade.

''We chose Debian as the baseline since it is probably the "slowest" popular Linux distribution.
Other distributions such as Ubuntu, Fedora, Red Hat, etc. should always have a compiler in their latest stable distribution that is at least recent as the one in Debian stable.''

Since MinGW does not tag their releases, we update the version we test with from time to time.

The policy for LLVM is currently to support >=2.9 and will be changed to the same as GCC once it gets into Debian.

'''Note''' that we might make one exception in the future for SeqAn 2.0 to drop support for compilers with insufficient C++11 support.
Candidates for this are Visual C++ 8 and 9.
However, by then Visual C++ 11 ("2011") should be available so there are two versions with "good enough" C++11
Also, since Microsoft distributes free versions of its C++ compilers ("express edition"), we do not see this as a problem.