
== CommandLineParser Changes ==

[[TOC()]]

'''Disclaimer''': This page is not the documentation of the new argument parser but describes future ideas we plan to implement in the future.

=== Named Parameters ===

*Helps with many optional parameters.
*Follow implementation of [http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_37_0/libs/parameter/doc/html/index.html Boost.Parameter] but without all the generic fluff.

=== Load Flags From File/Env ===

*Similar to Google command line parser.
*Add <tt>--flag-file</tt> parameter to load flags from, just like command line options.
*Add <tt>--from-env</tt> parameter to get parameters from <tt>ENV</tt> environment variable.

=== Boolean Flags ===

*For each boolean flag <tt>--flag</tt>, automatically add <tt>--noflag</tt>.

=== Utility Functions ===

*Get string of command line arguments.



=== Implemented Ideas ===

For historical and documentation reasons we keep a list of implemented ideas.


==== Supporting CTD File Export ====

==== Supporting Input/Output File And File List Types ====

Dependency of [#SupportingCTDFileExport Supporting CTD File Export].

==== Supporting Restrictions of filetypes and values ====

Dependency of [#SupportingCTDFileExport Supporting CTD File Export].

<pre>
#cpp

addOption("a", .. , OptionType::Double , ..);
restrict("a", -1.0, 1.0);

addOption("a", .. , OptionType::INPUTFILE , ..);
restrict("a", "*.FASTA");

addOption("a", .. , OptionType::STRING , ..);
restrict("a", "VALUE1"); // howto define lists here????
</pre>

==== Changing <tt>parse()</tt> Return Values ====

Currently, returns <tt>true</tt>/<tt>false</tt>.
However, no distinction is made between failure and "already has printed <tt>--version</tt> or <tt>--help</tt>.


==== Text Formatting Improvements ====

*Add simple substitution macros, e.g. <tt>%{prog}</tt> for program name.
*Float text to console width.
*Allow <tt>*highlighted*</tt> and <tt>*strongly highlighted*</tt> support.

==== Rich Documentation Export ====

*Embed richer information about usage in program text.
*Allow generation of extended command line documentation with <tt>--help=full</tt>.
*Generate HTML files or man pages using <tt>--help=html</tt>, <tt>--help=man</tt>.
**man pages: http://www.linuxfocus.org/English/November2003/article309.shtml



{{TracNotice|{{PAGENAME}}}}